README.md, before:

# What is OpenMRS/Banda Health

OpenMRS is an open source medical records system that is deployed around the world. You can find more information at [OpenMRS.org](https://openmrs.org). Banda Health (formerly OpenHMIS) adds hospital management features on top of OpenMRS; information about it can be found at [bandahealth.org](https://www.bandahealth.org). Documentation for configuring OpenHMIS can be found on the [OpenMRS Wiki](https://wiki.openmrs.org/display/docs/OpenHMIS+Modules).

# OpenHMIS Docker Images

These docker images will install the OpenMRS platform, OpenMRS reference application, and the latest OpenHMIS modules. The images will also optionally create a demo database with a limited amount of patients, observations, and the minimal configuration data needed for the OpenHMIS modules to be used. The naming convention for the tags uses the following format: `<Omrs Platform Version>_<Ref App Version>`. For images that do not include the reference application modules no second version number is defined.

Branches have been created to track the last released version of the major and minor releases. These branches do not include the minor and/or patch version number.

The images are tagged by OpenMRS platform and reference application versions:

    OpenMRS Platform 2.1.3 with Reference App 2.8.0 (tag: 2.1.3_2.8.0)
    OpenMRS Platform 2.1.3 without the reference app (tag: 2.1.3)

To get the latest release, the following tags can be used:

    Latest released OpenMRS Platform 2.1.x with the latest released Reference App 2.x (tag: latest)

The `latest` tag will always be the image for the last released platform with the last released reference application.

# How to Use the OpenHMIS Images using docker-compose

## Summarized steps with our defined defaults

1. Install docker
2. Install docker-compose
3. Create a directory where you will download the docker-compose file. After creating this directory, cd (change directory) to the created directory.
4. Download the compose file: `curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenHMIS/openmrs-docker/master/docker-compose.yml -o docker-compose.yml`
5. `docker-compose up -d` - this installs and configures both the openmrs and mysql containers. 
6. Once the docker container is up and running, run `docker ps` - This will show you the active containers. Note the `port` number for the openmrs container and use it to access the webapp for instance `http://localhost:9901/openmrs`
7. Use `docker-compose stop` and `docker-compose start` to stop and start the containers respectively.

# To customize your docker-compose settings

There are a number of Environment Variables to set in the docker compose file, namely:

### container_name: nameofthecontainer
This is the name of the container. You can change this to any name you would like.

### image: openhmis/openmrs-docker:latest
Incase you want to pull from a pre-built container that is already in the dockerhub registry then make sure this line is uncomment and edit the tag with whatever version of openmrs you want to install. You will find a list of tags that you can use here: https://hub.docker.com/r/openhmis/openmrs-docker/tags/

### build
build:
  context: .
These 2 lines allow you to build your container. This is useful if you have made changes to any of the files in this repo for instance if you have made a change to the run.sh script then  you need to build the container for the changes to take effect. Remember to comment out the image line above since you are building a new container instead of pulling a pre-existing one.
    
### restart: unless-stopped
This is the docker restart policy. This will restart the docker container except in the case where it was stopped. You can see more information here: https://docs.docker.com/config/containers/start-containers-automatically/

### depends_on:
- mysqlcontainername
This is how docker compose will prioritize which container will start before the other. So in this case the mysql container needs to start before the openmrs container. NB You need to specify the same container name that you give the mysql container in your compose file.

### links:
- mysqlcontainername:mysql
This is how the openmrs container will obtain the IP of the mysql container. The :mysql is the mysql containers hostname and should not be changed. In the OpenMRS properties file, we give the mysql container's hostname as the connection string instead of hardcoding the initial mysql container's IP that may keep on changing. NB: This works well with mysql 5.6 and mysql 5.7 containers.

### ports:
- portonhost:portoncontainer
This will map the openmrs's container port to the host's port.

### volumes:
- openmrs:/root/.OpenMRS
This is optional. You can use this to expose openmrs working directory to the host so you can easily access modules and so on.

## OpenHMIS Environment Variables
    environment:
      - DB_NAME=databasename
      - OPENMRS_MYSQL_HOST=nameofmysqlhost
      - OPENMRS_MYSQL_PORT=mysqlport
      # Uncomment to load demo data
      - DEMO_DATA=1
      - DB_USER=mysqlrootusername
      - DB_PASS=mysqlrootpassword
      - EXCLUDE_OPENHMIS=1

### DEMO_DATA

Tells the script to load the demo data. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

### DB_USER (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL user account that will be used to prepare the database. This account must have access to create databases and users. Note that this is not the account which will be used by OpenMRS.

### DB_PASS (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL account password.

### OPENMRS_MYSQL_HOST

The MySQL host ip address. If not specified this will be the address defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

### OPENMRS_MYSQL_PORT

The MySQL host port. If not specified this will be the port defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

### DB_NAME

The name to use for the OpenMRS database. If not defined this will be set to the default database name for the image selected. If a database with the specified name already exists it will not be updated and the specified OpenMRS user will be given access to it.

### EXCLUDE_OPENHMIS

Tells the script to not download and install the OpenHMIS modules. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

### Limit the memory and cpu resources that the containers use

    Default is 50% of CPU; 2GB of RAM and 4GB of swap respectively:
    cpu_percent: 50
    cpus: 0.5
    mem_limit: 2000000000
    memswap_limit: 4000000000

### Create the openmrs and mysql containers using docker-compose

This assumes you are in the directory from where you have copied over the files in this repository. So run the command. This will download the images if not present and start up the containers as defined in the docker-compose.yml file. This command will create the containers and start them.

    docker-compose up -d
 
For more instruction on the options for docker-compose, you can run the docker-compose --help option

### Stop and Start the openmrs and mysql containers using docker-compose

From the directory with the docker-compose.yml file, run the following command:

    docker-compose stop

To start the services/containers:

    docker-compose start

For more instruction on the options for docker-compose, you can run the docker-compose --help option

### Deleting the containers, volumes and images

If you want to destroy all the data, containers and images, the run this command

    docker-compose down --rmi all -v 

For more instruction on the options for docker-compose, you can run the docker-compose --help option

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Alternative docker run instructions

## How to Use the OpenHMIS Images Using docker run

### Setting up MySQL

This image assumes that MySQL will be running in separate server or another image. To set up a MySQL instance via docker:

    docker run --name openmrs-mysql -v <LOCAL_PATH>:/var/lib/mysql -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=test -d -p=3306:3306 mysql/mysql-server:5.6

Replace `<LOCAL_PATH>` with a path on your local OS that can be accessed by the docker-machine. While this volume mapping is not required, doing this will allow the data to be retained across restarts. Note that this command may not work properly when run in OS X due to a permissions error unless [docker-machine-nfs](https://github.com/adlogix/docker-machine-nfs) is used.

###### Note that there are different security options for the MySQL accounts. See [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/mysql/mysql-server/) for more information.


### Start the OpenMRS Instance

Once the MySQL image is downloaded and running you can now start the OpenHMIS image:

    docker run --name openhmis-test --link openmrs-mysql:mysql -it -p 9999:8080 -e DEMO_DATA=1 -e DB_USER='root' -e DB_PASS='test' openhmis/openmrs-docker:latest

This command will start a new container called 'openhmis-test' and link it to the running MySQL instance (note that the name matches the MySQL docker image we created). We are mapping the instance port 8080 to the local port 9999 so that we can easily browse the site on development machines that already have port 8080 in use. The command also sets a few variables to configure the installation process, see below for the list of available variables. Lastly, the command is loading the image defined at [openhmis/openmrs-docker](https://hub.docker.com/r/openhmis/openmrs-docker/) under the latest tag.

###### Note that images including the reference application can take up to 10 minutes to load.

### Connect to OpenMRS

Once the OpenMRS image has finished loading (look for a line like: `INFO: Server startup in 232561 ms`) the server can be accessed in one of two ways:

1. Via `localhost` on mapped port. Note that some host OS's will require port mapping in the VM for this to work correctly via localhost.
2. Via the image's ip address on the mapped port. The image ip address can be found via `docker-machine ip default` (though this might be specific to OS X).

All instances with demo data have the following users (username:password):

* Super User - admin:Admin123
* Inventory User - inventory:Inventory123
* Cashier User - cashier:Cashier123

### Environment Variables

#### DEMO_DATA

Tells the script to load the demo data. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

#### DB_USER (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL user account that will be used to prepare the database. This account must have access to create databases and users. Note that this is not the account which will be used by OpenMRS.

#### DB_PASS (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL account password.

#### OPENMRS_MYSQL_HOST

The MySQL host ip address. If not specified this will be the address defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

#### OPENMRS_MYSQL_PORT

The MySQL host port. If not specified this will be the port defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

#### DB_NAME

The name to use for the OpenMRS database. If not defined this will be set to the default database name for the image selected. If a database with the specified name already exists it will not be updated and the specified OpenMRS user will be given access to it.

#### OPENMRS_DB_USER

The MySQL user account that will be used by OpenMRS to connect to the database. If not defined this will be set to the default defined in the dockerfile.

#### OPENMRS_DB_PASS

The MySQL account password for the OpenMRS user account. If not defined this will be set to the default defined in the dockerfile.

#### OPENMRS_DATABASE_SCRIPT

The full path and file name to the compressed (zipped) database population script. If not defined the demo data for the specified image will be used.

#### EXCLUDE_OPENHMIS

Tells the script to not download and install the OpenHMIS modules. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

# User Feedback

If you have any issues with this installation or comments/improvements, feel free to contact the Banda Health team on [Chat](https://chat.openhmisafrica.org/home) or on [OpenMRS Talk](https://talk.openmrs.org).

Commit message:

Add instructions on how to build images locally

README.md, after:

# What is OpenMRS/Banda Health

OpenMRS is an open source medical records system that is deployed around the world. You can find more information at [OpenMRS.org](https://openmrs.org). Banda Health (formerly OpenHMIS) adds hospital management features on top of OpenMRS; information about it can be found at [bandahealth.org](https://www.bandahealth.org). Documentation for configuring OpenHMIS can be found on the [OpenMRS Wiki](https://wiki.openmrs.org/display/docs/OpenHMIS+Modules).

# OpenHMIS Docker Images

These docker images will install the OpenMRS platform, OpenMRS reference application, and the latest OpenHMIS modules. The images will also optionally create a demo database with a limited amount of patients, observations, and the minimal configuration data needed for the OpenHMIS modules to be used. The naming convention for the tags uses the following format: `<Omrs Platform Version>_<Ref App Version>`. For images that do not include the reference application modules no second version number is defined.

Branches have been created to track the last released version of the major and minor releases. These branches do not include the minor and/or patch version number.

The images are tagged by OpenMRS platform and reference application versions:

    OpenMRS Platform 2.1.3 with Reference App 2.8.0 (tag: 2.1.3_2.8.0)
    OpenMRS Platform 2.1.3 without the reference app (tag: 2.1.3)

To get the latest release, the following tags can be used:

    Latest released OpenMRS Platform 2.1.x with the latest released Reference App 2.x (tag: latest)

The `latest` tag will always be the image for the last released platform with the last released reference application.

# How to Use the OpenHMIS Images using docker-compose

## Summarized steps with our defined defaults

1. Install docker
2. Install docker-compose
3. Create a directory where you will download the docker-compose file. After creating this directory, cd (change directory) to the created directory.
4. Download the compose file: `curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenHMIS/openmrs-docker/master/docker-compose.yml -o docker-compose.yml`
5. `docker-compose up -d` - this installs and configures both the openmrs and mysql containers. 
6. Once the docker container is up and running, run `docker ps` - This will show you the active containers. Note the `port` number for the openmrs container and use it to access the webapp for instance `http://localhost:9901/openmrs`
7. Use `docker-compose stop` and `docker-compose start` to stop and start the containers respectively.

# To customize your docker-compose settings

There are a number of Environment Variables to set in the docker compose file, namely:

### container_name: nameofthecontainer
This is the name of the container. You can change this to any name you would like.

### image: openhmis/openmrs-docker:latest
Incase you want to pull from a pre-built container that is already in the dockerhub registry then make sure this line is uncomment and edit the tag with whatever version of openmrs you want to install. You will find a list of tags that you can use here: https://hub.docker.com/r/openhmis/openmrs-docker/tags/

### build
build:
  context: .
These 2 lines allow you to build your container. This is useful if you have made changes to any of the files in this repo for instance if you have made a change to the run.sh script then  you need to build the container for the changes to take effect. Remember to comment out the image line above since you are building a new container instead of pulling a pre-existing one.
When you build you use the following docker-compose command: (The images will be built on the foreground)

     docker-compose up --build 
    
### restart: unless-stopped
This is the docker restart policy. This will restart the docker container except in the case where it was stopped. You can see more information here: https://docs.docker.com/config/containers/start-containers-automatically/

### depends_on:
- mysqlcontainername
This is how docker compose will prioritize which container will start before the other. So in this case the mysql container needs to start before the openmrs container. NB You need to specify the same container name that you give the mysql container in your compose file.

### links:
- mysqlcontainername:mysql
This is how the openmrs container will obtain the IP of the mysql container. The :mysql is the mysql containers hostname and should not be changed. In the OpenMRS properties file, we give the mysql container's hostname as the connection string instead of hardcoding the initial mysql container's IP that may keep on changing. NB: This works well with mysql 5.6 and mysql 5.7 containers.

### ports:
- portonhost:portoncontainer
This will map the openmrs's container port to the host's port.

### volumes:
- openmrs:/root/.OpenMRS
This is optional. You can use this to expose openmrs working directory to the host so you can easily access modules and so on.

## OpenHMIS Environment Variables
    environment:
      - DB_NAME=databasename
      - OPENMRS_MYSQL_HOST=nameofmysqlhost
      - OPENMRS_MYSQL_PORT=mysqlport
      # Uncomment to load demo data
      - DEMO_DATA=1
      - DB_USER=mysqlrootusername
      - DB_PASS=mysqlrootpassword
      - EXCLUDE_OPENHMIS=1

### DEMO_DATA

Tells the script to load the demo data. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

### DB_USER (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL user account that will be used to prepare the database. This account must have access to create databases and users. Note that this is not the account which will be used by OpenMRS.

### DB_PASS (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL account password.

### OPENMRS_MYSQL_HOST

The MySQL host ip address. If not specified this will be the address defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

### OPENMRS_MYSQL_PORT

The MySQL host port. If not specified this will be the port defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

### DB_NAME

The name to use for the OpenMRS database. If not defined this will be set to the default database name for the image selected. If a database with the specified name already exists it will not be updated and the specified OpenMRS user will be given access to it.

### EXCLUDE_OPENHMIS

Tells the script to not download and install the OpenHMIS modules. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

### Limit the memory and cpu resources that the containers use

    Default is 50% of CPU; 2GB of RAM and 4GB of swap respectively:
    cpu_percent: 50
    cpus: 0.5
    mem_limit: 2000000000
    memswap_limit: 4000000000

### Create the openmrs and mysql containers using docker-compose

This assumes you are in the directory from where you have copied over the files in this repository. So run the command. This will download the images if not present and start up the containers as defined in the docker-compose.yml file. This command will create the containers and start them.

    docker-compose up -d
 
For more instruction on the options for docker-compose, you can run the docker-compose --help option

### Stop and Start the openmrs and mysql containers using docker-compose

From the directory with the docker-compose.yml file, run the following command:

    docker-compose stop

To start the services/containers:

    docker-compose start

For more instruction on the options for docker-compose, you can run the docker-compose --help option

### Deleting the containers, volumes and images

If you want to destroy all the data, containers and images, the run this command

    docker-compose down --rmi all -v 

For more instruction on the options for docker-compose, you can run the docker-compose --help option

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Alternative docker run instructions

## How to Use the OpenHMIS Images Using docker run

### Setting up MySQL

This image assumes that MySQL will be running in separate server or another image. To set up a MySQL instance via docker:

    docker run --name openmrs-mysql -v <LOCAL_PATH>:/var/lib/mysql -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=test -d -p=3306:3306 mysql/mysql-server:5.6

Replace `<LOCAL_PATH>` with a path on your local OS that can be accessed by the docker-machine. While this volume mapping is not required, doing this will allow the data to be retained across restarts. Note that this command may not work properly when run in OS X due to a permissions error unless [docker-machine-nfs](https://github.com/adlogix/docker-machine-nfs) is used.

###### Note that there are different security options for the MySQL accounts. See [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/mysql/mysql-server/) for more information.


### Start the OpenMRS Instance

Once the MySQL image is downloaded and running you can now start the OpenHMIS image:

    docker run --name openhmis-test --link openmrs-mysql:mysql -it -p 9999:8080 -e DEMO_DATA=1 -e DB_USER='root' -e DB_PASS='test' openhmis/openmrs-docker:latest

This command will start a new container called 'openhmis-test' and link it to the running MySQL instance (note that the name matches the MySQL docker image we created). We are mapping the instance port 8080 to the local port 9999 so that we can easily browse the site on development machines that already have port 8080 in use. The command also sets a few variables to configure the installation process, see below for the list of available variables. Lastly, the command is loading the image defined at [openhmis/openmrs-docker](https://hub.docker.com/r/openhmis/openmrs-docker/) under the latest tag.

###### Note that images including the reference application can take up to 10 minutes to load.

### Connect to OpenMRS

Once the OpenMRS image has finished loading (look for a line like: `INFO: Server startup in 232561 ms`) the server can be accessed in one of two ways:

1. Via `localhost` on mapped port. Note that some host OS's will require port mapping in the VM for this to work correctly via localhost.
2. Via the image's ip address on the mapped port. The image ip address can be found via `docker-machine ip default` (though this might be specific to OS X).

All instances with demo data have the following users (username:password):

* Super User - admin:Admin123
* Inventory User - inventory:Inventory123
* Cashier User - cashier:Cashier123

### Environment Variables

#### DEMO_DATA

Tells the script to load the demo data. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

#### DB_USER (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL user account that will be used to prepare the database. This account must have access to create databases and users. Note that this is not the account which will be used by OpenMRS.

#### DB_PASS (Required if loading demo data)

The MySQL account password.

#### OPENMRS_MYSQL_HOST

The MySQL host ip address. If not specified this will be the address defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

#### OPENMRS_MYSQL_PORT

The MySQL host port. If not specified this will be the port defined in MYSQL_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR which gets set via the linked MySQL image.

#### DB_NAME

The name to use for the OpenMRS database. If not defined this will be set to the default database name for the image selected. If a database with the specified name already exists it will not be updated and the specified OpenMRS user will be given access to it.

#### OPENMRS_DB_USER

The MySQL user account that will be used by OpenMRS to connect to the database. If not defined this will be set to the default defined in the dockerfile.

#### OPENMRS_DB_PASS

The MySQL account password for the OpenMRS user account. If not defined this will be set to the default defined in the dockerfile.

#### OPENMRS_DATABASE_SCRIPT

The full path and file name to the compressed (zipped) database population script. If not defined the demo data for the specified image will be used.

#### EXCLUDE_OPENHMIS

Tells the script to not download and install the OpenHMIS modules. This parameter simply needs to be set to something, the value does not matter.

# User Feedback

If you have any issues with this installation or comments/improvements, feel free to contact the Banda Health team on [Chat](https://chat.openhmisafrica.org/home) or on [OpenMRS Talk](https://talk.openmrs.org).
